# Dataset - (Ford GoBike System Data)
## by (NWANAGU James Ifeanyichukwu)


## Dataset

> This data set includes information about individual rides made in a bike-sharing system covering the greater San Francisco Bay area and was sourced from [here](https://video.udacity-data.com/topher/2020/October/5f91cf38_201902-fordgobike-tripdata/201902-fordgobike-tripdata.csv). This dataset contains 183412 Data rows and a total of 16 columns. The dataset was a bit dirty and messy. The age was represented by year of birth. I performed a lambda arithmetic operation on the column series and created a new age column for the dataset. From the start time column, I extracted the month, Day of the weeks, and time of the day into different columns. The month extracted from start time column happens to be February. This column will not be relevant because all our data are contained in that month. The time duration for a complete ride was presented in seconds which was not clear enough. The least time duration was 61 seconds which is a 1.1minutes duration. I converted the duration to minutes which is a proper representation of time duration. Columns that we will not be working with for our analysis were discarded including the month column. There were some missing data in our datasets too. The rows containing these missing data were dropped. Erroneous data type was corrected. After cleaning, the dataset to work with was having 174952 rows and 14 columns.


## Summary of Findings

> UNIVARIATE PLOTTING : After performing cleaning operation on our dataset, we had 174952 data with 14 columns. To avoid over plotting, I created a subset of top 10 stations location with highest ride frequendy to lowest ride frequency that I will be working with. They include;

> 1. 'Market St at 10th St',
> 2. 'San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St)',
> 3. 'Berry St at 4th St',
> 4. 'Montgomery St BART Station (Market St at 2nd St)',
> 5. 'Powell St BART Station (Market St at 4th St)',
> 6. 'San Francisco Caltrain (Townsend St at 4th St)',
> 7. 'San Francisco Ferry Building (Harry Bridges Plaza)',
> 8. 'Howard St at Beale St',
> 9. 'Steuart St at Market St',
> 10. 'Powell St BART Station (Market St at 5th St)'

> The duration for complete trip and age were skewed to the right. To correct this, i performed a log transformation on these variables and found out that most trips were completed in 8 to 12 minutes range, while the average age of most riders was around 30. Weekdays tend to be the favourite days for riders with Thursday and Tuesday having the most trips, while mondays have least trips for weekdays. Riders make the most trip during the morning and afternoon hours of the day. This should be as a result of working hours duration. Night appears to be the period with least rides. For Users, males have the most trip than female and other. Subcribers tend to have the most trip than customers.

> BIVARIATE PLOTTING : Age of riders for the Top 10 stations have a median of around 30. This further shows that the majority of riders are around workable age of 30. Duration have a median of around 10 minutes for all top 10 station location. This corresponds to our earlier plot on the duration of riders. In all 10 locations, weekdays have most rides than weekends. Among the weekdays, thursday and tuesday have the most trips, while monday have the least trip. Unlike the former distribution of station plot that made Market St at 10th St the station with the most rides, this plot gives a better insight. San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St) and Market St at 10th St have the most ride for weekdays, especially thursdays and tuesdays, but Market St at 10th St have most rides for weekends which i believe could be as a result of tourist presence. This could suggest that Market St at 10th St have much more attractive sites than San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St). Morning and Afternoon have the most ride for the top 10 stations. San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St) have the most ride for morning. This is different for Market St at 10th St that have almost equal rides for both afternoon and morning period. This further strengthens our assumption on Market St at 10th St been made up of employees and tourists. Male have most rides than female. Subscribers tends to have more rides than customers. Market St at 10th St have the most suscribers. The median age for most riders during the weekdays are slightly higher than those of weekends, but they are still around the range of 30. This shows that more younger people ride during the weekends. This further proves the age of most riders to be around 30. Subcribers tend to ride mostly on thursday and tuesdays. Morning hours also have the most ride for subscribers, while afternoon hours have most ride for customers. Male have more rides than females and others and they all have most rides in the morning hours. Weekends have the longest duration of rides than weekdays. Afternoon and night also have longer duration of rides than morning. There was a negative relationship between age and duration. Riders with age average of 30 have the most rides with duration of around 10 minutes.

> MULTIVARIATE PLOTTING : Market St at 10th St and San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St) were ranked top two stations having the most traffic of over three thousand rides, with weekdays having the most rides than weekends. Comparing Market St at 10th St and San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St) weekend rides showed that Market St at 10th St have most trips for weekends than San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St). Subscribers have most rides for weekdays than weekends. Customers on the other hand have most rides on weekends than weekdays. This could justify our assumption that subscribers are mostly made up of employees or residents in that area, while customers may just be visitors or tourist visiting the location. For our all top 10 station location, San Francisco Ferry Building (Harry Bridges Plaza) have the most weekend ride for customers. This location seems to be the most attrative site for tourist. Weekends have the longest duration for a complete trip. Weekdays still maintains around 10 minutes duration. Night riders tend to have a longer ride duration than morning and afternoon. Investigating further with user type shows that duration of subscribers trips by day of the week lies around 10mins for weekdays and a slight increase for weekends, this is not the same for customers having trips which duration tend to be above 10mins for both weekdays and weekends. For both user type, night period always have longer duration.

## Key Insights for Presentation

> In finding out when and where riders make the most trip and the characteristics (age, user_type, gender) that influence when they chose to make those trips. i found out that most trips are located in Market St at 10th St and San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St). There are more rides for weekdays than weekends. Subscribers have most rides for weekdays while Customers on the other hand have most rides on weekends. Of the top 2 station locations, Market St at 10th St have most trips for weekends than San Francisco Caltrain Station 2 (Townsend St at 4th St), while for our all top 10 station location, San Francisco Ferry Building (Harry Bridges Plaza) and Powell St BART Station (Market St at 4th St) have the most weekend ride for customers. Duration of trip for customers is longer than that of subscribers for every day of the week and time of the day.